# C_Data_Structures

Implementation of the basic data structures written in C. All implementations include support for any data type.
The data_structures folder includes implementations of:

    1. Linked Lists -> Singly Linked, Doubly Linked
    2. Stacks -> Classic Linked Implementation, Dropout Stack, Array-Based Stack
    3. Queues -> Classic Linked Implementation, Deque (Double Ended Queue), Array-Based Queue, Circular Queue
    4. Hash Table -> With chaining used to resolve collisions
    5. Graphs -> Undirected Graph (Adjacency Matrix Implementation), Directed Graph (Adjacency Matrix Implementation)

Future versions will include tree and bitmap implementations. The concept of a Hashed Array Tree (HAT) will be used to implement an N-Ary tree.

## General Overview

The goal of this project for myself was to gain a stronger understanding of the C programming language as a whole. Having taken only an intro course on C in the first year of my engineering degree and having not used it much since, I was wanting to strengthen my abilities as I am hoping to work as a firmware engineer, an area of electrical and computer engineering where C is most prevalent.

I do not claim to have implemented everything in the best possible way, however, I am satisfied with the overall results and functionality presently available.

On completion of the first version of this library I have gained a strong understanding of:

- Pointers/Pointer arithmetic
- Memory Management
- Structs and typedefs
- Header file structure and standards
- Header guards
- Compiler directives
- Makefiles
- Unit testing in C (without a framework)

<br>

### Example and Test File Compilation

There are two separate Makefiles included in this project used for compiling all examples, and the other for compiling all tests.

To compile all example files, first navigate to the examples directory in the terminal and run

    make

On successful compilation, any example can be run using

    ./example_name

The same can be done for the included tests, by navigating to the tests directory and running the make command when in that directory.

To run all tests, run the included bash script on windows using

    ./run_tests.sh

or on macOs or Linux with bash,

    chmod +x run_tests.sh
    ./run_tests.sh

<br>

### Relevant Comments

Upon compilation with either Makefile, the compiler will issue warning in relation to type conversions. Due to the fact that the library accepts any type to be stored in the implemented data structures, all types are specified as void pointers. When an element to insert is not cast to its pointer type explicitly, the compiler will issue a warning. The examples and tests simply pass raw values rather than pointers as elements to store which overall makes the API more user friendly.

A testing framework was not used in this project, however, a bash script which runs all test executables generated by an included Makefile has been used as a way to run tests. The assert macro has simply been used to create these tests.

<br>

## Compiling and Running a File Using the Library

To compile and run a .c file that uses any of these data structures, the file to compile, as well as the .c file which contains the function definitions of the prototypes can be compiled with gcc as follows:

    gcc file_to_compile.c header_definition_file.c -o desired_name_of_executable

For example, if using the singly_linked_list.h header file directly within the project, the following compilation statement would be used:

    gcc singly_linked_list_test.c ../data_structures/linked_lists/singly_linked_list/singly_linked_list.c -o singly_linked_list

The following command will run the created executable

    .\singly_linked_list

If a data structure relies on another in the library as part of its implementation, the following syntax would be used:

    gcc file_to_compile.c header_definition_file.c additional_structure_definition_file_1.c ... -o desired_name_of_executable

The "..." before -o indicates that the preceding statement may need to be used multiple times if there are multiple data structures from the library used to implement the current structure.

For example, if using the dropout_stack.h header file directly within the project, the following compilation statement would be used as it relies on a singly linked list in its implementation:

    gcc dropout_stack_test.c ../data_structures/stacks/dropout_stack/dropout_stack.c ../data_structures/linked_lists/singly_linked_list/singly_linked_list.c -o dropout_stack_test
